FDISK68 / FDISK80
ver. 1.0 of 05-Jun-2015
(1.0 release)


FDISKxx is a "work-similar" program for the N8VEM systems running any of 
RomWBW, UNA, or Mini-M68k BIOS.  It functions to partition hard disk media, 
such as Compact Flash cards and Secure Digital cards to operate in a manner 
that provides three-way compatibility among the three CP/M operating systems: 
RomWBW CP/M 2.2, UNA CP/M 2.2, and Mini-M68K CP/M-68.

Slices:  Beginning with RomWBW CP/M 2.2, hard disk media used no partition 
table, but simply sliced up the lowest sectors on a disk into up to 8 x 8Mb
CP/M file systems.  Each file system also had a 256 sector boot area at its
head.  In HEX, each slice occupied 0x4100 sectors, 0x100 sectors at the head
as a boot area, and 0x4000 == 16384 sectors of actual CP/M directory and files.
16384 x 512 bytes = 8Mb of disk space.  UNA CP/M can use this system of 8Mb 
slices starting at sector 0, and when doing so, is completely compatible with 
the RomWBW file system.

Partitions:  CP/M-68 for the Motorola 68000 CPU's allows file systems of up to
512Mb.  Thus the Mini-M68k implementation was designed to use the DOS partition
table to specify partitions containing CP/M file systems of any size, up to the
maximum.  When the partitions size is exactly 8Mb, all of the file system 
parameters (allocation size, number of director entries, &c.) are exactly the 
same as the Z80 8Mb slices.  Hence, if a CP/M-68 partition (of type "CP/M" == 
0x52) of exactly 16384 sectors exactly overlays one of the RomWBW/UNA data 
slices, the three systems can read and write files on that particular slice /
partition.

CF and SD cards:  These media are widespread nowadays and are normally 
distributed with the IBM/MS FAT file system, usually FAT16 or FAT32.  Luckily,
all off-the-shelf media contain a DOS partition table, with the entire device 
allocated to DOS primary partition 1 (counting 1..4).  Commercial operating 
systems use only partition 1, and do not look at the other partitions, even if
the device is re-partitioned.  By repartitioning one of these cards, leaving
space at the beginning of the "disk" for Slices, and re-allocating partition 1
to be a FAT file system on higher sectors of the disk, such a device is usable
on Windows, MAC, and Linux, needing only to have the proper FAT file system 
formatted by the commercial system.

FAT12/FAT16:  Both the UNA BIOS and the Mini-M68K BIOS can read the two older 
versions of the FAT file specification.  This speeded OS development for UNA 
and and Mini-M68K operating systems by allowing test programs to be written 
to CF/SD media on the cross-development system, and immediately booted on the 
target SBC.  Up to this time, only Linux 'fdisk,' although cumbersome, was 
able to partition these media.  The creation of CP/M "slice overlay" partitions
is especially tedious, since proper alignment is absolutely necessary.  

FDISKxx:  The 'fdisk' tool is distributed as two executable files:  FDISK80.COM
for RomWBW, UNA CP/M, or UNA standalone operation; and FDISK68.OUT for 
standalone operation on the Mini-M68K.  Standalone operation means that the 
file can be executed from a FAT file system on removable media.  CP/M operation
means that it can be executed from within CP/M and, as such, may be distributed
as part of a CP/M volume, specifically, a ROMdisk image.  


Program Usage

Commands:  All FDISKxx commands are single letters, the first letter of a 
mnemonic
for the operation.  The entirety of FDISKxx is case-insensitive.  For clarity, 
this documentation will use both upper and lower case, but use of the shift 
key within the program is not necessary.

Numbers:  Except when a command specifically asks for 'hex' input, numbers may 
be typed in radix 8, 10, or 16.  The usual C-programming language conventions 
apply.  Hexadecimal numbers begin with "0x" (zero, exx); e.g., 0x100, 0xFFFF, 
0x157ad.  Octal numbers begin with a leading "0" (zero); e.g., 0400, 0177777, 
0253655.  Decimal numbers begin with "1..9"; e.g., 256, 65535, 87981.

When specifying locations on the disk, and partition sizes, sometimes larger 
numbers are needed.  In these cases, a multiplier suffix may be attached to a 
number, as defined above; viz.,  1M == 1024k.  There are three usual multiplier
suffixes:  "G", "M", "K" having the usual meaning:  Giga (1024*1024*1024), 
Mega (1024*1024), and Kilo (1024).  There is also the odd suffix, "U", meaning 
Unit (1), which has use with hexadecimal values, described below.

	1G = 1024M,  1M = 1024K, 1K = 1024U = 1024.

Disk locations, and partition sizes, may also be specified in terms of sectors,
tracks/heads, or cylinders, and sizes in terms of bytes.  This gives rise to 
four more numeric suffixes; namely, "Y", "T", "S", "B", standing for:  
cYlinder, Track, Sector, and Byte.  Further, disk locations bear no prefix, 
but partition sizes bear the prefix "+".

		100y	disk location at cylinder 100
		100	disk location at 100; the default unit being cylinders
		0x100s  disk location at sector 256
		1T	disk location at track 1
		512b == 1s  sector 1 location = byte 512 location (oddball 
			usage of B)
		+8Mb	disk size of 8 megabytes (M is multiplier, B is byte 
			unit)

Hint:  S is the most commonly use location suffix, and B is the most commonly 
used size suffix.  Note:  0x11B and 0x11uB are different.  The U must be used 
with a hex number if the Byte size specifier is in use.

Geometry:  Traditionally, hard disks use moving platters, moving heads, and 
were divided into cylinders, that which could be accessed without moving the 
arm(s) holding the heads, tracks (accessed by multiple heads), that which 
could be accessed in one disk rotation, and sectors, the addressable unit of 
conglomerate data, most often 512 bytes each.  These three values, often 
abbreviated "C:H:S" for Cylinder/Head(track)/Sector were fixed by the disk 
hardware, and were the means of communicating a sector location to the disk 
hardware.  CHS geometry is a legacy of the old disk structure.  It has been 
made obsolete by the advent of intelligent controllers, which simply address 
sectors with a 28-bit or 48-bit address.  This last is known as Logical Block 
Addressing, or LBA for short.

CF cards interface through an IDE interface, and a disk geometry, i.e., values 
for C, H, and S, are still assigned.  However, LBA is easier to use, and all 
CF cards support LBA.  SD cards have abandoned CHS entirely, and are only addressable LBA.  However, in aligning partitions, as is needed for CP/M-68 / CP/M 2.2 cross compatibility, CHS has its uses.

Commands:  All commands are unique in the first letter and, as stated before, 
are case insensitive.  Hence, "p", "P", "Print", and "punt" are equivalent.  
If a command begins with an unrecognized letter, the advisory message "? for 
help" will be displayed.

Here are the commands in alphabetic order:

? -- see Help, below.

Activate - toggle the 'active' flag ("*") on a partition, which marks the 
partition as bootable.  If more than one partition is marked active at a time,
a cautionary message is issued.

Delete - delete the specified partition.  The command will prompt for the 
partition number to be deleted.  Delete removes the partition specification 
from the partition table, and does not affect the partition specification of 
any of the remaining partitions.  Optionally, the partition to be deleted may 
be specified as a parameter to the command; e.g., "delete 4" or "d 4".

Geometry - management of disk geometry.  The virtual geometry of the disk may 
be assigned using this command.  First the number of sectors per head (track) 
will be prompted for.  <CR> keeps the existing number.  Then the number of 
tracks (heads) per cylinder will be prompted for.  <CR> retains the existing 
number.  Finally a summary of the disk geometry to be used is displayed.  The 
CHS values in the partition table are updated if the new geometry is different
from the old.

Help - will print a brief command help page.  "?" is equivalent.  A one-line 
description of all commands available from the command prompt is printed.  
These descriptions are just short reminders.

Initialize - wipe the entire partition table, including reserved slices, and 
start with a fully empty partition table specification.  Disk geometry is not 
affected by this command.  Initialize is equivalent to Deleting each partition
individually and resizing the reserved slice count to zero.

List - print a brief list of some useful partition types.  Since partition 
types range from 00 to FF (hex), the complete list is very long.  About a 
dozen and a half of those of most interest to the Z80/Z180/MC68000 community 
are listed.  This command is accessible from within the partition Type 
assignment command, as well as at the command level.

New - create a new partition.  The command will first prompt for the partition
number to be created.  An empty slot must be specified or else an error occurs.
The second prompt is for the starting location of the partition in default 
units, usually Cylinders.  Any unit  of disk position may be specified, other 
than the default, by using one of the "Y", "T", or "S" number suffixes as 
described above.  Cylinders is the most common unit used, and careful selection
of disk geometry, described above, can result in particular alignment of the 
new partition.  Third, the ending location is prompted for.  Two possible 
specifications may be used.  First the ending location may be specified as a 
number in the same fashion as the the starting location, and using any of the 
location overrides above.  Or, the ending location may be specified as a 
partition size by prefixing the number with a "+" sign.  The same overrides 
apply, and in addition, the "B" (byte) size suffix may be used.

Special cases:  cylinder 0, track 0, or sector 0, taken as the partition start,
will be rounded to 1T to protect the master boot record (which contains the 
partition table).  An ending location, or size, which extends beyond the end 
of the media will be truncated to the last sector on the disk.

Print - prints the current partition table and notice of any slices known to 
be reserved.  The printed table lists, in order, the partition number, 
partition type in text format, if known, the active flag ("*"), partition type
in hexadecimal, CHS start of the partition expressed in terms of the current 
geometry setting, CHS end of the partition in terms of the current geometry, 
the absolute LBA address of the partition, the LBA sector count, or size of 
the partition in sectors, and an approximate size in a compact form (in bytes).

Type - change the industry-wide type setting, a byte, of a partition.  The 
type indication is specified in hexadecimal; no "0x" prefix is needed.  The 
actual type of a partition actually depends on the actual contents of the 
partition.  Different operating systems depend more or less on the type field 
in the partition table.  However, it is a good idea to be as accurate as 
possible in getting this field correct.

Quit - exit FDISKxx without saving changes.  Nothing is written back to the 
disk; all changes being worked on, or experimented with, are lost.

Reserve - reserve space on the lowest sectors of the disk for CP/M slices of 
8Mb each, or modify the currently reserved number of slices.  As described 
above, slices are 0x4100 sectors in size = 0x100s boot area + 0x4000s data 
area.  If Reserve is used before New, then newly created partitions will be 
unable to share any storage with the CP/M slices.  See below for details of 
creating CP/M-68 partitions that overlay slices.

Unit - prompts for the disk unit to have its partition table edited.  This 
command is automatically invoked when FDISKxx is brought up.  Subsequent uses of "Unit" may be to refresh the original partition table, in case one does not like the layout one is currently editing.

RomWBW:  the unit is specified as the decimal number assigned by HBIOS, which 
may be displayed from the boot prompt with the "L" (list) command.  Unit 
numbers are "1", "2", &c.
UNA-BIOS:  the unit is specified as the decimal number assigned by the BIOS:  
"1", "2", &c.
Mini-M68K:  the unit is specified as the disk letter assigned by the BIOS:  
"C:", "D:", &c.

Zed - is reserved for use in FDISKxx for debugging.  It is specified as "Z#",
where # is a digit between 0 and 5.  The higher the debug level, the more 
debugging output is produced by the program.  The "Help" command will tell 
you whether the version of FDISKxx you are running has the capability of 
producing debugging output.


Examples

Creating slices for CP/M 2.2:

1. Execute FDISKxx, specifying the disk unit to be modified.
2. I - command:  wipe the old partition table.  Or, D-command:  delete 
partition 1.
3. G - command:  set the new geometry to S/H: 16,  H/C:  16.  This will fudge 
the cylinder size to 256s (0x100s).
4. R - command:  reserve as many slices as you wish, up to 8.
5. N - command:  partition 1,  start: (use the default),  size:  specify by 
location or by size, remembering that +xxMb can be larger than the media, and 
will be chopped back to the last sector on the disk.
6. T - command:  set the type of partition 1 to (FAT12/FAT16/FAT32)
7. W - command:  update the partition table on the media.

Format partition 1 on your host system.  See the final comments below on 
multi-system usage.
 
N.B.:  As of CP/M-68 released May-2016 slices are recognized without the need
to overlay them with type 0x52 partitions.  Hence, the procedure below is
unnecessary.  The procedure above is sufficient.

Creating a CP/M 2.2 // CP/M-68 // Windows/MAC multi-platform disk from a 
new CF or SD card:

1. Execute FDISKxx, specifying the disk unit to be modified.
2. I - command:  wipe the old partition table.
3. G - command:  set the new geometry to S/H: 16,  H/C:  16.  This will fudge 
the cylinder size to 256s (0x100s) facilitating the creation of CP/M-68 slice 
overlay partitions.
4. N - command:  partition: 2,  start: 1y,  end:  +8Mb.  This will create a 
partition with LBA start = 256, and LBA count = 16384.
5. T - command:  partition 2,  new type:  52.  This changes the partition type
to 0x52, to be used by CP/M-68 to overlay the first CP/M 2.2 slice, which 
still has to be reserved.  A type 0x52 partition so aligned will not be seen 
as a conflict by the later R - command.
6. N - command:  partition 3,  start (default 65):  66y,  end:  +8Mb; note the
start is one beyond the default start.
7. T - command:  partition 3, new type 52,
8. N - command:  partition 3,  start (default 130):  131y,  end:  +8Mb; start 
is one beyond the default.
9. R - command:  reserve as many slices as you wish, up to 8.
10.   N - command:  partition 1, start:  (use the default),  end: specify the 
size you want, up to the entire rest of the card.
11.   T - command:  possibly set a new type (FAT12/FAT16/FAT32) type for 
partition 1.
12.   W - command:  if you are satisfied with the result, write the new 
partition table to the media.

Partition 1 will have to be formatted on your host system to one of the FAT 
file system types.  If FAT12 or FAT16 is used, then UNA-BIOS and the Mini-M68K
BIOS will be able to read the directory and execute stand-alone programs.  
UNA-BIOS can also burn new BIOS images read from the CF or SD card.

The slices will have to be formatted when you bring up CP/M.

(end)

